# Q1. Local development setup

Describe how you would set up a local system to develop an application using a LAPP and LAMP stack.

# Answer

The followig prerequisites are required to complete this set up:
* Ubuntu 22.04 LTS

## DISCLOSURE

Since this question is aimed towards ones technical expertise, I opted for an approach that involves more coding and explaining. However, a LAMP stack could be installed with one command:

```
sudo apt-get install lamp-server^ 
```

## Installing Apache

Start by updating the software repositories:

```
sudo apt update && sudo apt upgrade -y
```

Then, install Apache:

``` 
sudo apt install apache2 
```

If the installation was successful, test and see if your browser has access to port 80 by visiting `localhost` or `127.0.0.1`. If you don't see the  Apache2 default page it means that Apache doesn't have access to it. In this case, follow the instructions to update the firewall

## Updating the Firewall (Optional)

Note: This step is marked optional as a local develpment LAMP server doesn't really need a firewall, unless you're forwarding email!

Since Apache communicates by default over port 80, you need to set the firewall to allow connections on port 80:

``` 
sudo ufw allow in "Apache" 
```

Verify the change with:

```
sudo ufw status 
```

## Installing MySQL

The next step is to set up MySQL database. Install MySQL with the following command:

```
sudo apt install mysql-server
```

by default, MySQL server's root password is empty and need to be set. Login to MySQL server as root:

```
sudo mysql -u root
```

Update the password of root:

```
ALTER USER 'root'@'localhost' IDENTIFIED WITH mysql_native_password BY 'SOME_PASSWORD';
FLUSH PRIVILEGES;
exit;
```

Note: If you want to secure your password, you could run `sudo mysql_secure_installation` command and follow the promt. However, it's not necessary for a local development st up.

Start the interactive script by running, then complete the prompts:

```
sudo mysql_secure_installation
```

## Installing phpMyAdmin

To administer the MySQL server, install phpMyAdmin including its extensions, and complete the prompts:

```
sudo apt install phpmyadmin php-mbstring php-zip php-gd php-json php-curl        
```


## Installing PHP
Now that the web server and database have been installed, the next step is to install PHP:

```
sudo apt install php libapache2-mod-php php-mysql
```

Check if the installation was successful by printing the version of PHP:

```
php -v
```

A successfull installation should show you the version of PHP.

## Creating Virtual Hosts

By default, apache looks in `/var/www/html` directory for content to serve. Create a new directory for your project at its root;

```
cd /var/www/html/
sudo mkdir myproject
```

Next, change the directory's ownership to the user currently loggedin - you.

```
sudo chown -R $USER:$USER /var/www/html/myproject/
```

Copy apache's default virtual host file and use it as a template to create one for our domain:

```
sudo cp /etc/apache2/sites-available/000-default.conf /etc/apache2/sites-available/myproject.conf
```

Now, edit the file with the following configuration settings:

```
<VirtualHost *:80>
   ServerAdmin admin@localhost
   ServerName myproject
   ServerAlias www.myproject
   DocumentRoot /var/www/html/myproject
   ErrorLog ${APACHE_LOG_DIR}/error.log
   CustomLog ${APACHE_LOG_DIR}/access.log combined
</VirtualHost>
```

Next, enable to new virtual host file:

```
sudo a2ensite myproject.conf
```

In order to avoid the default configuration of apache to override our virtual host, we disable it:

```
sudo a2dissite 000-default.conf
````

Then, test to see if there's any configuration errors:

```
sudo apache2ctl configtest
```

Finally, restart apache and check its status:

```
sudo systemctl restart apache2
sudo systemctl status apache2
```
